containers/README.md, before:

# QuantEcon Containers

This directory contains Docker container definitions for building QuantEcon lectures.

## Available Containers

| Container | Image | Size | Use Case |
|-----------|-------|------|----------|
| **quantecon** | `ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon:latest` | ~8GB | Full compatibility - includes Anaconda + TexLive |
| **quantecon-build** | `ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon-build:latest` | ~3GB | Optimized for CI builds - lean package set |

## Container Comparison

### quantecon (Full)

**Best for:** Local development, maximum compatibility, running all lecture code

- Full Anaconda 2025.12 distribution
- Complete TexLive installation
- All Jupyter Book extensions
- ~450+ pre-installed packages

```yaml
container:
  image: ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon:latest
```

### quantecon-build (Lean)

**Best for:** CI/CD pipelines, faster image pulls, lecture HTML/PDF builds

- Miniconda + explicit package list (only what's needed)
- Minimal TexLive (XeLaTeX + required packages)
- Jupyter Book build tools only
- ~100 packages, ~60% smaller

```yaml
container:
  image: ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon-build:latest
```

## Choosing a Container

| Scenario | Recommended |
|----------|-------------|
| GitHub Actions CI builds | `quantecon-build` |
| Local development | `quantecon` |
| Running lecture notebooks interactively | `quantecon` |
| Building HTML/PDF only | `quantecon-build` |
| Testing new packages | `quantecon` |

## Package Coverage

The `quantecon-build` container includes packages used across all QuantEcon lecture series:
- [lecture-python-intro](https://github.com/QuantEcon/lecture-python-intro)
- [lecture-python.myst](https://github.com/QuantEcon/lecture-python.myst)
- [lecture-python-advanced.myst](https://github.com/QuantEcon/lecture-python-advanced.myst)
- [lecture-python-programming.myst](https://github.com/QuantEcon/lecture-python-programming.myst)

Lecture-specific packages not in the container are installed at build time via `environment.yml`.

## Building Locally

```bash
# Build full container
cd containers/quantecon
docker build -t ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon:latest .

# Build lean container
cd containers/quantecon-build
docker build -t ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon-build:latest .
```

## Container Detection

Both containers include a marker file at `/etc/quantecon-container` that allows the `setup-environment` action to detect container mode and skip redundant installations.

## GPU Support

GPU containers (for JAX/PyTorch CUDA) are not yet available. See [FUTURE-DEVELOPMENT.md](../docs/FUTURE-DEVELOPMENT.md) for roadmap.

Commit message:

Remove hardcoded ML libs install from setup-environment (#25)
* Remove hardcoded ML libs install from setup-environment

Remove install-ml-libs and ml-libs-version inputs — ML/GPU libraries
(JAX, PyTorch, numpyro) should be specified in each repo's
environment.yml or environment-update.yml instead.

JAX now bundles its own CUDA toolkit via pip (jax[cuda13]), so
system-level CUDA installation is unnecessary — GPU drivers on the
AMI are sufficient.

Updates: action.yml, README, PLAN.md, MIGRATION-GUIDE.md,
QUICK-REFERENCE.md, CHANGELOG.md

* Add GPU AMI setup guide

Document NVIDIA driver requirements for RunsOn AMI builds when using
JAX with bundled CUDA (jax[cuda13]).

Key points:
- Only NVIDIA driver (>= 580) required on AMI
- CUDA toolkit/cuDNN bundled in jax[cuda13] wheel
- Includes Packer template example
- Troubleshooting and verification steps

Also update containers/README.md and docs/README.md to reference new guide.

* Mark ML libs removal as breaking change in CHANGELOG

Add BREAKING marker and migration note for clarity, though breaking
changes are expected in 0.x releases before v1.0.0 stabilizes the API.

containers/README.md, after:

# QuantEcon Containers

This directory contains Docker container definitions for building QuantEcon lectures.

## Available Containers

| Container | Image | Size | Use Case |
|-----------|-------|------|----------|
| **quantecon** | `ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon:latest` | ~8GB | Full compatibility - includes Anaconda + TexLive |
| **quantecon-build** | `ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon-build:latest` | ~3GB | Optimized for CI builds - lean package set |

## Container Comparison

### quantecon (Full)

**Best for:** Local development, maximum compatibility, running all lecture code

- Full Anaconda 2025.12 distribution
- Complete TexLive installation
- All Jupyter Book extensions
- ~450+ pre-installed packages

```yaml
container:
  image: ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon:latest
```

### quantecon-build (Lean)

**Best for:** CI/CD pipelines, faster image pulls, lecture HTML/PDF builds

- Miniconda + explicit package list (only what's needed)
- Minimal TexLive (XeLaTeX + required packages)
- Jupyter Book build tools only
- ~100 packages, ~60% smaller

```yaml
container:
  image: ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon-build:latest
```

## Choosing a Container

| Scenario | Recommended |
|----------|-------------|
| GitHub Actions CI builds | `quantecon-build` |
| Local development | `quantecon` |
| Running lecture notebooks interactively | `quantecon` |
| Building HTML/PDF only | `quantecon-build` |
| Testing new packages | `quantecon` |

## Package Coverage

The `quantecon-build` container includes packages used across all QuantEcon lecture series:
- [lecture-python-intro](https://github.com/QuantEcon/lecture-python-intro)
- [lecture-python.myst](https://github.com/QuantEcon/lecture-python.myst)
- [lecture-python-advanced.myst](https://github.com/QuantEcon/lecture-python-advanced.myst)
- [lecture-python-programming.myst](https://github.com/QuantEcon/lecture-python-programming.myst)

Lecture-specific packages not in the container are installed at build time via `environment.yml`.

## Building Locally

```bash
# Build full container
cd containers/quantecon
docker build -t ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon:latest .

# Build lean container
cd containers/quantecon-build
docker build -t ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon-build:latest .
```

## Container Detection

Both containers include a marker file at `/etc/quantecon-container` that allows the `setup-environment` action to detect container mode and skip redundant installations.

## GPU Support

GPU builds use RunsOn with a custom Ubuntu AMI (not a container). The AMI includes NVIDIA drivers while ML libraries (JAX, PyTorch) bundle their own CUDA toolkit.

**See:** [GPU-AMI-SETUP.md](../docs/GPU-AMI-SETUP.md) for AMI build instructions and driver requirements.
