docs/MIGRATION-GUIDE.md, before:

# Migration Guide: Converting Lecture Repos to Use QuantEcon Actions

This guide provides step-by-step instructions for migrating a QuantEcon lecture repository to use the centralized composite actions.

## Overview

**Goal:** Replace repetitive workflow setup code with reusable, cached composite actions.

**Benefits:**
- ⚡ 5-6 minute setup time reduction (via Conda caching)
- 🔧 Centralized maintenance (update once, benefit everywhere)
- 📊 Consistent build environments across all repos
- 🐛 Easier troubleshooting and updates
- 🎯 Unified environment setup (single action for Conda + LaTeX)

**Time Required:** ~1-2 hours per repository (including testing)

---

## Prerequisites

Before starting migration:

- [ ] Ensure `quantecon/actions` repository is published
- [ ] Have a test branch ready in target repository
- [ ] Know which features your repo uses (ML libs, LaTeX, etc.)

---

## Quick Migration: Using setup-environment

**Recommended approach:**

### Before (Manual Setup)
```yaml
- name: Setup Anaconda
  uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
  with:
    python-version: "3.13"
    environment-file: environment.yml  # This is setup-miniconda's own input name
    activate-environment: quantecon

- name: Install LaTeX
  run: |
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install -y texlive-latex-extra ...
```

### After (Unified Action)
```yaml
- uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
  with:
    python-version: '3.13'
    environment: 'environment.yml'
    install-latex: 'true'
    latex-requirements-file: 'latex-requirements.txt'
    environment-name: 'quantecon'
```

**Benefits:** Simpler configuration, Conda caching (~5-6 min saved), unified setup.

---

## Detailed Step-by-Step Migration

### Step 1: Identify Your Repository Type

Determine which features your repository needs:

| Repository | ML Libs (JAX/PyTorch) | LaTeX | Netlify | Notes |
|------------|----------------------|-------|---------|-------|
| lecture-python.myst | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | Most complex |
| lecture-python-programming.myst | ❌ No | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | Standard |
| lecture-python-intro | ❌ No | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | Standard |
| lecture-python-advanced.myst | ❌ No | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | Standard |

### Step 2: Create Test Branch

```bash
cd /path/to/your/lecture-repo
git checkout -b migrate/composite-actions
```

### Step 3: Backup Current Workflows

```bash
cp -r .github/workflows .github/workflows.backup
```

### Step 4: Update `ci.yml`

#### Before (example from lecture-python.myst):

```yaml
name: Build Project [using jupyter-book]
on: [pull_request]

jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - name: Setup Anaconda
        uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
        with:
          auto-update-conda: true
          auto-activate-base: true
          miniconda-version: 'latest'
          python-version: "3.13"
          environment-file: environment.yml  # This is setup-miniconda's own input name
          activate-environment: quantecon
      
      - name: Install latex dependencies
        run: |
          sudo apt-get -qq update
          sudo apt-get install -y texlive-latex-recommended texlive-latex-extra ...
      
      # ... 40+ more lines of setup
      
      - name: Build HTML
        shell: bash -l {0}
        run: |
          jb build lectures --path-output ./ -n -W --keep-going
```

#### After:

```yaml
name: Build Project [using jupyter-book]
on: [pull_request]

jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
        with:
          fetch-depth: 0
      
      # Setup environment with caching
      - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
        with:
          python-version: '3.13'
          environment: 'environment.yml'
          environment-name: 'quantecon'
          install-latex: 'true'
          install-ml-libs: 'false'  # Set to 'true' for lecture-python.myst
      
      # Build lectures (with cache restore for fast incremental builds)
      - uses: quantecon/actions/restore-jupyter-cache@v1
        with:
          cache-type: 'build'
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        id: build
        with:
          source-dir: 'lectures'
          builder: 'html'
          upload-failure-reports: true  # Upload reports if build fails
      
      # Deploy preview
      - uses: quantecon/actions/preview-netlify@v1
        with:
          netlify-auth-token: ${{ secrets.NETLIFY_AUTH_TOKEN }}
          netlify-site-id: ${{ secrets.NETLIFY_SITE_ID }}
          build-dir: ${{ steps.build.outputs.build-path }}
```

**Key Changes:**
- Replaced ~60 lines with ~10 lines
- Added `restore-jupyter-cache` for fast PR builds
- Unified error handling
- Clearer intent with named actions

### Step 5: Update `cache.yml`

#### Before:

```yaml
name: Build Cache [using jupyter-book]
on:
  schedule:
    - cron: '0 3 * * 1'
  workflow_dispatch:

jobs:
  cache:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v5
      
      - name: Setup Anaconda
        uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
        with:
          auto-update-conda: true
          # ... many lines
      
      - name: Build HTML
        shell: bash -l {0}
        run: |
          jb build lectures --path-output ./ -W --keep-going
      
      - name: Upload "_build" folder (cache)
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v5
        with:
          name: build-cache
          path: _build
```

#### After (Recommended: Using build-jupyter-cache Action):

```yaml
name: Build Cache
on:
  schedule:
    - cron: '0 0 * * 0'  # Weekly Sunday midnight UTC
  workflow_dispatch:      # Manual trigger
  push:
    branches:
      - main
    paths:
      - 'environment.yml'  # Auto-rebuild when env changes

jobs:
  cache:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon:latest
    permissions:
      contents: read
      issues: write
      packages: read
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-jupyter-cache@v1
        with:
          builders: 'html'
          create-issue-on-failure: true
```

**Key Changes:**
- Uses dedicated `build-jupyter-cache` action
- Automatically handles cache key generation (`build-{env-hash}-{run-id}`)
- Creates issues on failure (with duplicate prevention)
- Verifies build before saving cache
- Push trigger rebuilds cache when `environment.yml` changes on main

### Step 6: Update `publish.yml`

#### Before:

```yaml
name: Build & Publish to GH Pages
on:
  push:
    tags:
      - 'publish*'

jobs:
  publish:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v5
      
      - name: Setup Anaconda
        uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
        # ... many lines
      
      - name: Build HTML
        shell: bash -l {0}
        run: |
          jb build lectures --path-output ./ -n -W --keep-going
      
      - name: Deploy to gh-pages
        uses: peaceiris/actions-gh-pages@v4
        # ...
```

#### After:

```yaml
name: Build & Publish to GH Pages
on:
  push:
    tags:
      - 'publish*'

permissions:
  contents: read
  pages: write
  id-token: write

concurrency:
  group: "pages"
  cancel-in-progress: false

jobs:
  publish:
    if: github.event_name == 'push' && startsWith(github.event.ref, 'refs/tags')
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    environment:
      name: github-pages
      url: ${{ steps.deploy.outputs.page-url }}
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
        with:
          install-latex: 'true'
          install-ml-libs: 'false'  # Adjust per repo
      
      # Build PDF
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        with:
          builder: 'pdflatex'
          upload-failure-reports: true
      
      # Build notebooks
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        with:
          builder: 'jupyter'
          upload-failure-reports: true
      
      # Build HTML and assemble all assets
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        id: build
        with:
          builder: 'html'
          html-copy-pdf: true
          html-copy-notebooks: true
          upload-failure-reports: true
      
      # Deploy to GitHub Pages
      - uses: quantecon/actions/publish-gh-pages@v1
        id: deploy
        with:
          build-dir: ${{ steps.build.outputs.build-path }}
          cname: 'python.quantecon.org'  # Adjust per repo
```

**Key Changes:**
- Uses native GitHub Pages deployment (requires `pages: write` and `id-token: write` permissions)
- Builds PDF, notebooks, then HTML with asset assembly
- `html-copy-pdf` and `html-copy-notebooks` assemble all formats into HTML folder
- `upload-failure-reports` helps debug build failures

### Step 7: Repository-Specific Adjustments

#### For `lecture-python.myst` (with GPU/ML libs):

```yaml
# In ci.yml, cache.yml, publish.yml:
- uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
  with:
    install-latex: 'true'
    install-ml-libs: 'true'  # Enable ML libraries
    ml-libs-version: 'jax062-torch-nightly-cuda12'  # For cache key

# Also update runner if needed:
jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: "runs-on=${{ github.run_id }}/family=g4dn.2xlarge/..."
```

#### For `collab.yml` (Google Colab container):

This workflow uses a different container and may need custom handling:

```yaml
# collab.yml may need to stay as-is or use partial actions
# The Google Colab container environment is different from standard Ubuntu

# Option 1: Keep as-is for now
# Option 2: Use only build-lectures action
- uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
  with:
    build-html: 'true'
    cache-workflow: 'cache.yml'
```

### Step 8: Testing

Test your migrated workflows:

1. **Create test workflow** (don't modify existing yet):
   ```bash
   cp .github/workflows/ci.yml .github/workflows/test-ci.yml
   ```

2. **Modify test-ci.yml** to use actions and manual trigger:
   ```yaml
   name: Test CI (New Actions)
   on: workflow_dispatch  # Manual trigger only
   ```

3. **Push test branch and run workflow**:
   ```bash
   git add .github/workflows/test-ci.yml
   git commit -m "Add test workflow with composite actions"
   git push origin migrate/composite-actions
   ```

4. **Manually trigger** the workflow from GitHub Actions UI

5. **Compare results**:
   - Build time (should improve on second run)
   - Build artifacts (should be identical)
   - Execution reports

### Step 9: Validation Checklist

Before merging, verify:

- [ ] Test workflow completes successfully
- [ ] Build time reduced on cached runs
- [ ] HTML output identical to production build
- [ ] PDF output identical (if applicable)
- [ ] Notebooks identical (if applicable)
- [ ] No new errors or warnings
- [ ] Cache created and restored properly
- [ ] All secrets still work (Netlify, GitHub tokens)

### Step 10: Merge and Monitor

1. **Update actual workflows** (not test ones):
   ```bash
   # Copy working test-ci.yml to ci.yml
   cp .github/workflows/test-ci.yml .github/workflows/ci.yml
   # Remove test workflow
   rm .github/workflows/test-ci.yml
   ```

2. **Create PR**:
   ```bash
   git add .github/workflows/
   git commit -m "Migrate to quantecon/actions composite actions

   - Adds caching for conda, pip, and LaTeX
   - Reduces setup time from 8-12 min to ~1 min (cached)
   - Centralizes workflow logic for easier maintenance
   - Tested with manual workflow runs"
   
   git push origin migrate/composite-actions
   ```

3. **Review and merge**

4. **Monitor first 5 workflow runs**:
   - Check execution times
   - Verify caching behavior
   - Watch for any errors

5. **Clean up after 1 week**:
   ```bash
   # Remove backup if everything is working
   rm -rf .github/workflows.backup
   ```

---

## Repository-Specific Notes

### lecture-python.myst

**Special requirements:**
- GPU runners: `runs-on: "runs-on=${{ github.run_id }}/family=g4dn.2xlarge/..."`
- ML libraries: Set `install-ml-libs: 'true'`
- CUDA support: Uses JAX 0.6.2 with CUDA 12

**Example ci.yml excerpt:**
```yaml
jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: "runs-on=${{ github.run_id }}/family=g4dn.2xlarge/image=quantecon_ubuntu2404/disk=large"
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
        with:
          install-latex: 'true'
          install-ml-libs: 'true'
          ml-libs-version: 'jax062-torch-nightly-cuda12'
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/restore-jupyter-cache@v1
        with:
          cache-type: 'build'
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        id: build
```

### lecture-python-programming.myst

**Standard setup** - no special requirements

**Example ci.yml excerpt:**
```yaml
jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon-build:latest
    permissions:
      contents: read
      packages: read
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
        with:
          environment-update: 'environment-update.yml'  # Delta packages for container
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/restore-jupyter-cache@v1
        with:
          cache-type: 'build'
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        id: build
```

### lecture-python-intro

**Standard setup** - no special requirements  
Same as lecture-python-programming.myst

### lecture-python-advanced.myst

**Standard setup** - no special requirements  
Same as lecture-python-programming.myst

---

## Troubleshooting

### Issue: Cache not working

**Symptom:** Every run installs packages from scratch

**Check:**
1. Verify cache key format matches
2. Check runner OS (cache keys include OS)
3. Verify paths are correct

**Solution:**
```yaml
# Add debug step
- name: Debug cache info
  run: |
    echo "OS: ${{ runner.os }}"
    echo "Hash: ${{ hashFiles('environment.yml') }}"
```

### Issue: Build output differs

**Symptom:** HTML/PDF differs from production

**Check:**
1. Package versions (conda list, pip list)
2. Jupyter Book version
3. Build commands

**Solution:** Pin versions in environment.yml

### Issue: Secrets not working

**Symptom:** Netlify/GitHub Pages deployment fails

**Check:**
1. Secret names match (case-sensitive)
2. Secrets are set in repository settings
3. Permissions are correct

**Solution:** Verify in repository Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions

---

## Rollback Procedure

If issues occur after migration:

### Emergency Rollback

```bash
# Restore from backup
rm -rf .github/workflows
cp -r .github/workflows.backup .github/workflows
git add .github/workflows
git commit -m "Rollback to pre-migration workflows"
git push origin main
```

### Partial Rollback

```yaml
# In affected workflow file, comment out action and restore original:

# - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1

- name: Setup Anaconda
  uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
  with:
    # ... original configuration
```

---

## Getting Help

If you encounter issues during migration:

1. Review action README files for configuration options
2. Open an issue in `quantecon/actions` with:
   - Repository name
   - Workflow file
   - Error logs
   - What you've tried

---

## Post-Migration

After successful migration:

1. **Document the change**:
   - Update repository README if needed
   - Note in changelog

2. **Share lessons learned**:
   - Update this guide with any issues found
   - Add troubleshooting tips

3. **Monitor metrics**:
   - Track build times (should improve significantly)
   - Watch for any degradation

4. **Update other repositories**:
   - Use this experience to migrate next repo
   - Refine process each time

---

## Migration Checklist Template

Copy this for each repository:

```markdown
## Migration: [Repository Name]

### Preparation
- [ ] Review action README files
- [ ] Identify repo type (ML libs? LaTeX? etc.)
- [ ] Create test branch
- [ ] Backup workflows

### Migration
- [ ] Update ci.yml
- [ ] Update cache.yml
- [ ] Update publish.yml
- [ ] Update other workflows (linkcheck, collab, etc.)
- [ ] Adjust for repository-specific needs

### Testing
- [ ] Create test workflow
- [ ] Run test workflow successfully
- [ ] Compare build artifacts
- [ ] Verify caching works
- [ ] Run 3+ times to confirm stability

### Deployment
- [ ] Update actual workflows
- [ ] Create PR with detailed description
- [ ] Code review
- [ ] Merge to main
- [ ] Monitor first 5 runs

### Cleanup
- [ ] Remove test workflows
- [ ] Remove backups (after 1 week)
- [ ] Update documentation
- [ ] Share lessons learned

### Metrics
- Build time before: _____ min
- Build time after (first run): _____ min
- Build time after (cached): _____ min
- Issues encountered: _____
- Resolution time: _____
```

Commit message:

Remove hardcoded ML libs install from setup-environment
Remove install-ml-libs and ml-libs-version inputs — ML/GPU libraries
(JAX, PyTorch, numpyro) should be specified in each repo's
environment.yml or environment-update.yml instead.

JAX now bundles its own CUDA toolkit via pip (jax[cuda13]), so
system-level CUDA installation is unnecessary — GPU drivers on the
AMI are sufficient.

Updates: action.yml, README, PLAN.md, MIGRATION-GUIDE.md,
QUICK-REFERENCE.md, CHANGELOG.md

docs/MIGRATION-GUIDE.md, after:

# Migration Guide: Converting Lecture Repos to Use QuantEcon Actions

This guide provides step-by-step instructions for migrating a QuantEcon lecture repository to use the centralized composite actions.

## Overview

**Goal:** Replace repetitive workflow setup code with reusable, cached composite actions.

**Benefits:**
- ⚡ 5-6 minute setup time reduction (via Conda caching)
- 🔧 Centralized maintenance (update once, benefit everywhere)
- 📊 Consistent build environments across all repos
- 🐛 Easier troubleshooting and updates
- 🎯 Unified environment setup (single action for Conda + LaTeX)

**Time Required:** ~1-2 hours per repository (including testing)

---

## Prerequisites

Before starting migration:

- [ ] Ensure `quantecon/actions` repository is published
- [ ] Have a test branch ready in target repository
- [ ] Know which features your repo uses (ML libs, LaTeX, etc.)

---

## Quick Migration: Using setup-environment

**Recommended approach:**

### Before (Manual Setup)
```yaml
- name: Setup Anaconda
  uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
  with:
    python-version: "3.13"
    environment-file: environment.yml  # This is setup-miniconda's own input name
    activate-environment: quantecon

- name: Install LaTeX
  run: |
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install -y texlive-latex-extra ...
```

### After (Unified Action)
```yaml
- uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
  with:
    python-version: '3.13'
    environment: 'environment.yml'
    install-latex: 'true'
    latex-requirements-file: 'latex-requirements.txt'
    environment-name: 'quantecon'
```

**Benefits:** Simpler configuration, Conda caching (~5-6 min saved), unified setup.

---

## Detailed Step-by-Step Migration

### Step 1: Identify Your Repository Type

Determine which features your repository needs:

| Repository | ML Libs (JAX/PyTorch) | LaTeX | Netlify | Notes |
|------------|----------------------|-------|---------|-------|
| lecture-python.myst | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | Most complex |
| lecture-python-programming.myst | ❌ No | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | Standard |
| lecture-python-intro | ❌ No | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | Standard |
| lecture-python-advanced.myst | ❌ No | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes | Standard |

### Step 2: Create Test Branch

```bash
cd /path/to/your/lecture-repo
git checkout -b migrate/composite-actions
```

### Step 3: Backup Current Workflows

```bash
cp -r .github/workflows .github/workflows.backup
```

### Step 4: Update `ci.yml`

#### Before (example from lecture-python.myst):

```yaml
name: Build Project [using jupyter-book]
on: [pull_request]

jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - name: Setup Anaconda
        uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
        with:
          auto-update-conda: true
          auto-activate-base: true
          miniconda-version: 'latest'
          python-version: "3.13"
          environment-file: environment.yml  # This is setup-miniconda's own input name
          activate-environment: quantecon
      
      - name: Install latex dependencies
        run: |
          sudo apt-get -qq update
          sudo apt-get install -y texlive-latex-recommended texlive-latex-extra ...
      
      # ... 40+ more lines of setup
      
      - name: Build HTML
        shell: bash -l {0}
        run: |
          jb build lectures --path-output ./ -n -W --keep-going
```

#### After:

```yaml
name: Build Project [using jupyter-book]
on: [pull_request]

jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
        with:
          fetch-depth: 0
      
      # Setup environment with caching
      - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
        with:
          python-version: '3.13'
          environment: 'environment.yml'
          environment-name: 'quantecon'
          install-latex: 'true'
      
      # Build lectures (with cache restore for fast incremental builds)
      - uses: quantecon/actions/restore-jupyter-cache@v1
        with:
          cache-type: 'build'
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        id: build
        with:
          source-dir: 'lectures'
          builder: 'html'
          upload-failure-reports: true  # Upload reports if build fails
      
      # Deploy preview
      - uses: quantecon/actions/preview-netlify@v1
        with:
          netlify-auth-token: ${{ secrets.NETLIFY_AUTH_TOKEN }}
          netlify-site-id: ${{ secrets.NETLIFY_SITE_ID }}
          build-dir: ${{ steps.build.outputs.build-path }}
```

**Key Changes:**
- Replaced ~60 lines with ~10 lines
- Added `restore-jupyter-cache` for fast PR builds
- Unified error handling
- Clearer intent with named actions

### Step 5: Update `cache.yml`

#### Before:

```yaml
name: Build Cache [using jupyter-book]
on:
  schedule:
    - cron: '0 3 * * 1'
  workflow_dispatch:

jobs:
  cache:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v5
      
      - name: Setup Anaconda
        uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
        with:
          auto-update-conda: true
          # ... many lines
      
      - name: Build HTML
        shell: bash -l {0}
        run: |
          jb build lectures --path-output ./ -W --keep-going
      
      - name: Upload "_build" folder (cache)
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v5
        with:
          name: build-cache
          path: _build
```

#### After (Recommended: Using build-jupyter-cache Action):

```yaml
name: Build Cache
on:
  schedule:
    - cron: '0 0 * * 0'  # Weekly Sunday midnight UTC
  workflow_dispatch:      # Manual trigger
  push:
    branches:
      - main
    paths:
      - 'environment.yml'  # Auto-rebuild when env changes

jobs:
  cache:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon:latest
    permissions:
      contents: read
      issues: write
      packages: read
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-jupyter-cache@v1
        with:
          builders: 'html'
          create-issue-on-failure: true
```

**Key Changes:**
- Uses dedicated `build-jupyter-cache` action
- Automatically handles cache key generation (`build-{env-hash}-{run-id}`)
- Creates issues on failure (with duplicate prevention)
- Verifies build before saving cache
- Push trigger rebuilds cache when `environment.yml` changes on main

### Step 6: Update `publish.yml`

#### Before:

```yaml
name: Build & Publish to GH Pages
on:
  push:
    tags:
      - 'publish*'

jobs:
  publish:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v5
      
      - name: Setup Anaconda
        uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
        # ... many lines
      
      - name: Build HTML
        shell: bash -l {0}
        run: |
          jb build lectures --path-output ./ -n -W --keep-going
      
      - name: Deploy to gh-pages
        uses: peaceiris/actions-gh-pages@v4
        # ...
```

#### After:

```yaml
name: Build & Publish to GH Pages
on:
  push:
    tags:
      - 'publish*'

permissions:
  contents: read
  pages: write
  id-token: write

concurrency:
  group: "pages"
  cancel-in-progress: false

jobs:
  publish:
    if: github.event_name == 'push' && startsWith(github.event.ref, 'refs/tags')
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    environment:
      name: github-pages
      url: ${{ steps.deploy.outputs.page-url }}
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
        with:
          install-latex: 'true'
      
      # Build PDF
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        with:
          builder: 'pdflatex'
          upload-failure-reports: true
      
      # Build notebooks
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        with:
          builder: 'jupyter'
          upload-failure-reports: true
      
      # Build HTML and assemble all assets
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        id: build
        with:
          builder: 'html'
          html-copy-pdf: true
          html-copy-notebooks: true
          upload-failure-reports: true
      
      # Deploy to GitHub Pages
      - uses: quantecon/actions/publish-gh-pages@v1
        id: deploy
        with:
          build-dir: ${{ steps.build.outputs.build-path }}
          cname: 'python.quantecon.org'  # Adjust per repo
```

**Key Changes:**
- Uses native GitHub Pages deployment (requires `pages: write` and `id-token: write` permissions)
- Builds PDF, notebooks, then HTML with asset assembly
- `html-copy-pdf` and `html-copy-notebooks` assemble all formats into HTML folder
- `upload-failure-reports` helps debug build failures

### Step 7: Repository-Specific Adjustments

#### For `lecture-python.myst` (with GPU/ML libs):

```yaml
# In ci.yml, cache.yml, publish.yml:
# ML packages (JAX, PyTorch, numpyro) are specified in the repo's
# environment.yml or environment-update.yml, not in the action.
- uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
  with:
    environment-update: 'environment-update.yml'

# Also update runner if needed:
jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: "runs-on=${{ github.run_id }}/family=g4dn.2xlarge/..."
```

#### For `collab.yml` (Google Colab container):

This workflow uses a different container and may need custom handling:

```yaml
# collab.yml may need to stay as-is or use partial actions
# The Google Colab container environment is different from standard Ubuntu

# Option 1: Keep as-is for now
# Option 2: Use only build-lectures action
- uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
  with:
    build-html: 'true'
    cache-workflow: 'cache.yml'
```

### Step 8: Testing

Test your migrated workflows:

1. **Create test workflow** (don't modify existing yet):
   ```bash
   cp .github/workflows/ci.yml .github/workflows/test-ci.yml
   ```

2. **Modify test-ci.yml** to use actions and manual trigger:
   ```yaml
   name: Test CI (New Actions)
   on: workflow_dispatch  # Manual trigger only
   ```

3. **Push test branch and run workflow**:
   ```bash
   git add .github/workflows/test-ci.yml
   git commit -m "Add test workflow with composite actions"
   git push origin migrate/composite-actions
   ```

4. **Manually trigger** the workflow from GitHub Actions UI

5. **Compare results**:
   - Build time (should improve on second run)
   - Build artifacts (should be identical)
   - Execution reports

### Step 9: Validation Checklist

Before merging, verify:

- [ ] Test workflow completes successfully
- [ ] Build time reduced on cached runs
- [ ] HTML output identical to production build
- [ ] PDF output identical (if applicable)
- [ ] Notebooks identical (if applicable)
- [ ] No new errors or warnings
- [ ] Cache created and restored properly
- [ ] All secrets still work (Netlify, GitHub tokens)

### Step 10: Merge and Monitor

1. **Update actual workflows** (not test ones):
   ```bash
   # Copy working test-ci.yml to ci.yml
   cp .github/workflows/test-ci.yml .github/workflows/ci.yml
   # Remove test workflow
   rm .github/workflows/test-ci.yml
   ```

2. **Create PR**:
   ```bash
   git add .github/workflows/
   git commit -m "Migrate to quantecon/actions composite actions

   - Adds caching for conda, pip, and LaTeX
   - Reduces setup time from 8-12 min to ~1 min (cached)
   - Centralizes workflow logic for easier maintenance
   - Tested with manual workflow runs"
   
   git push origin migrate/composite-actions
   ```

3. **Review and merge**

4. **Monitor first 5 workflow runs**:
   - Check execution times
   - Verify caching behavior
   - Watch for any errors

5. **Clean up after 1 week**:
   ```bash
   # Remove backup if everything is working
   rm -rf .github/workflows.backup
   ```

---

## Repository-Specific Notes

### lecture-python.myst

**Special requirements:**
- GPU runners: `runs-on: "runs-on=${{ github.run_id }}/family=g4dn.2xlarge/..."`
- ML libraries: Specified in repo's `environment.yml` / `environment-update.yml` (JAX, PyTorch, numpyro)

**Example ci.yml excerpt:**
```yaml
jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: "runs-on=${{ github.run_id }}/family=g4dn.2xlarge/image=quantecon_ubuntu2404/disk=large"
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
        with:
          environment-update: 'environment-update.yml'
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/restore-jupyter-cache@v1
        with:
          cache-type: 'build'
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        id: build
```

### lecture-python-programming.myst

**Standard setup** - no special requirements

**Example ci.yml excerpt:**
```yaml
jobs:
  preview:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/quantecon/quantecon-build:latest
    permissions:
      contents: read
      packages: read
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1
        with:
          environment-update: 'environment-update.yml'  # Delta packages for container
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/restore-jupyter-cache@v1
        with:
          cache-type: 'build'
      
      - uses: quantecon/actions/build-lectures@v1
        id: build
```

### lecture-python-intro

**Standard setup** - no special requirements  
Same as lecture-python-programming.myst

### lecture-python-advanced.myst

**Standard setup** - no special requirements  
Same as lecture-python-programming.myst

---

## Troubleshooting

### Issue: Cache not working

**Symptom:** Every run installs packages from scratch

**Check:**
1. Verify cache key format matches
2. Check runner OS (cache keys include OS)
3. Verify paths are correct

**Solution:**
```yaml
# Add debug step
- name: Debug cache info
  run: |
    echo "OS: ${{ runner.os }}"
    echo "Hash: ${{ hashFiles('environment.yml') }}"
```

### Issue: Build output differs

**Symptom:** HTML/PDF differs from production

**Check:**
1. Package versions (conda list, pip list)
2. Jupyter Book version
3. Build commands

**Solution:** Pin versions in environment.yml

### Issue: Secrets not working

**Symptom:** Netlify/GitHub Pages deployment fails

**Check:**
1. Secret names match (case-sensitive)
2. Secrets are set in repository settings
3. Permissions are correct

**Solution:** Verify in repository Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions

---

## Rollback Procedure

If issues occur after migration:

### Emergency Rollback

```bash
# Restore from backup
rm -rf .github/workflows
cp -r .github/workflows.backup .github/workflows
git add .github/workflows
git commit -m "Rollback to pre-migration workflows"
git push origin main
```

### Partial Rollback

```yaml
# In affected workflow file, comment out action and restore original:

# - uses: quantecon/actions/setup-environment@v1

- name: Setup Anaconda
  uses: conda-incubator/setup-miniconda@v3
  with:
    # ... original configuration
```

---

## Getting Help

If you encounter issues during migration:

1. Review action README files for configuration options
2. Open an issue in `quantecon/actions` with:
   - Repository name
   - Workflow file
   - Error logs
   - What you've tried

---

## Post-Migration

After successful migration:

1. **Document the change**:
   - Update repository README if needed
   - Note in changelog

2. **Share lessons learned**:
   - Update this guide with any issues found
   - Add troubleshooting tips

3. **Monitor metrics**:
   - Track build times (should improve significantly)
   - Watch for any degradation

4. **Update other repositories**:
   - Use this experience to migrate next repo
   - Refine process each time

---

## Migration Checklist Template

Copy this for each repository:

```markdown
## Migration: [Repository Name]

### Preparation
- [ ] Review action README files
- [ ] Identify repo type (ML libs? LaTeX? etc.)
- [ ] Create test branch
- [ ] Backup workflows

### Migration
- [ ] Update ci.yml
- [ ] Update cache.yml
- [ ] Update publish.yml
- [ ] Update other workflows (linkcheck, collab, etc.)
- [ ] Adjust for repository-specific needs

### Testing
- [ ] Create test workflow
- [ ] Run test workflow successfully
- [ ] Compare build artifacts
- [ ] Verify caching works
- [ ] Run 3+ times to confirm stability

### Deployment
- [ ] Update actual workflows
- [ ] Create PR with detailed description
- [ ] Code review
- [ ] Merge to main
- [ ] Monitor first 5 runs

### Cleanup
- [ ] Remove test workflows
- [ ] Remove backups (after 1 week)
- [ ] Update documentation
- [ ] Share lessons learned

### Metrics
- Build time before: _____ min
- Build time after (first run): _____ min
- Build time after (cached): _____ min
- Issues encountered: _____
- Resolution time: _____
```
